---
layout: post
---

These steps are how I established my development setup for the MS-KKDCPP.  I
had a Windows 2012 Server that was a Domain Controller testbed in a previous
life, and a Windows 8 machine as client.  The MS-KKDCP is running on the
server.  Both were virtualized using RHEVM in the same lab.

### Server ###

One will need a Windows 2012 Server installed, with Domain and KDC
configured, which is providing DNS.

1. Start the KDC Proxy service on the server.  To do this, go into Server
   Manager, then from the "Tools" menu, click on "Services".  Make sure the
   KDC is running, then right-click on the "Kerberos KDC Proxy Service (KPS)"
   entry and choose "Properties". Under the "Log on" tab, choose "Local System
   Account" and click the checkbox for "Allow service to interact with
   desktop".  Under the "General" tab, set startup type to "Automatic" and
   start the service. Click "Apply" and close the window.

1. Configure web services on the server.  To do this, in Server Manager, from
   the "Tools" menu, choose "Internet Information Services (IIS) Manager".
   Expand the dropdown for the current mahine on the left, and again for
   "Sites".  Right-click on "Default" and select "Edit Bindings".  Click the
   "Add" button.  Type should be https, IP address should be "All Unassigned",
   Port 443, Hostname the name of the machine, and SSL certificate the
   certificate for the website.  Finish and close the bindings window.  Then
   under "Manage Website" on the right, stop the website if it is running,
   then start it again.

   If you do not have a certificate, you will need to generate one.  In IIS,
   click on the computer, then double-click on "Server Certificates".  From
   the "Actions" secton on the right side, choose "Create Domain
   Certificate...".  Set "Common Name" to the all-caps FQDN for the website,
   fill in the remaining fields (their values do not matter), then click
   "Next". Click "Select" to specify the CA, and give it the "Friendly Name"
   of your FQDN, again in all caps.  Click "Finish" to create the certificate.

1. Configure policy to use the MS-KKDCP.  In Server Manager, from the "Tools"
   menu, choose "Group Policy Management".  On the left, expand the "Forest",
   then "Domains", then the target domain.  Right-click the policy (for me
   it's "Default Domain Policy") and choose "Edit...".  In the new window, on
   the left expand "Computer Configuration", then "Policies", then
   "Administrative Templates", then "System", and finally select "Kerberos".
   In the main part of the window, right-click "Specify KDC proxy servers for
   Kerberos clients" and choose "Edit".  The syntax for this is important, so
   be sure to read the bottom left pane before clicking the "Show..."  button.
   Set "value name" to *, and then set value to the address of the server (in
   the form shown under the last example). Make sure this entry in the table
   is selected such that the |> glyph is on the desired line before clicking
   "OK".  On the top left of the window, switch from "Disabled" to "Enabled",
   then click "Apply" and close the window.  Then close the Group Policy
   Editor window.  Close and reopen Group Policy Management, and under the
   policy you should now see, under the Settings tab, an entry for Kerberos
   (you may have to expand a few levels in the main window section).

### Client ###

To join the client into the domain:

1. Log in to the client as a local administrator.  Open the file browser, then
   right-click "Computer" on the left and choolse "Properties...".  Click
   "Advanced System Settings" on the left, then choose the "Computer Name"
   tab.  Click the "Change..."  button, and enter the name of the Domain in
   the Domain field. Then click "OK".

   In order to join the domain, the client will need to be able to resolve
   addresses in the domain.  Most likely this will require switching DNS to
   use the controller DNS service.  To do this, open Control Panel, then click
   "Network and Internet". Click "Network and Sharing Center", then "Change
   Adapter Settings".  Right-click the Ethernet entry, and select
   "Properties...".  Select "Internet Protocol Version 4 (TCP/IPv4) and click
   "Properties".  Switch to "Use the following DNS server address:" and enter
   the address of the domain controller there, then click "OK".

To update group policy on the client:

1. Log in to the client as an administrative user on the domain.  This may
   work for an administrative user not on the domain but I have not tested it.

1. Force an update.  From the start menu, launch "Command prompt".  At the
   prompt, type `gpupdate /force` (without the backticks).  When the command
   completes, policy should be updated.

   In order for new policy to take effect, at least a logout and possibly a
   reboot is needed.

To force Kerberos traffic to use the MS-KKDCPP:

1. Open Control Panel.  Choose "System and Security", then "Windows Firewall".
   On the left, choose "Advanced Settings" to open the firewall rules.  On the
   left, select "Outbound Rules". On the right, click "New Rule...".  Choose
   "Port" for the rule type, then click "Next".  Choose TCP, then specify port
   88.  Click "Next".  Select "Block the connection", then click "Next".  Make
   sure it applies to the Domain network at minimum, though I had it apply to
   all, then click "Next".  Give it a memorable name such as "Kerberos Block
   TCP", and click "Finish".  Repeat this process for UDP as well.

### Observing traffic ###

To observe traffic, I ran wireshark on the server.  In general, this is really
bad practice; however, since both machines are virtual, the only other option
would have been to install on the hypervisor and run there.  (I did try
running it on another machine in the same lab; it cannot see the traffic.)
Ideally, one would run at least the client in a local vm, and then capture
traffic between them on the host.

To setup wireshark:

1. Verify the certificate is exportable.  Open IIS as before, then select the
   machine on the left.  Double-click on "Server Certificates", then
   right-click the certificate in use and choose "View...".  Make sure that
   under the "General" tab it indicates that a private key is available;
   otherwise, you will need to genearte a new certificate as explained above
   and use that instead.  Record the cerficate hash; it will be needed for the
   next step.

1. Open command prompt.  Run `certutil -exportpfx <hash> <name>` replacing
   &lt;hash&gt; with the hash from step (1) and &lt;outfile&gt; with the name
   of the file to write out to.  You will be prompted for a password; unlike
   openssl, if you leave this blank, it uses a blank password as the password.

1. Copy the file to a linux machine with OpenSSL installed. By far the easiest
   way to do this is to use WinSCP on the windows machine to copy the file
   over.

1. On the linux machine, in a shell, run `openssl pkcs12 -in <input> -nodes
   -out <output>.pem -nocerts -nodes` replacing &lt;input&gt; with the name of
   the file copied over and &lt;output&gt;.pem with the name of the desired
   result file.  You will be prompted for a password; enter the password used
   in step (2), remembering that if the password in step (2) was blank, so
   should this be.

5. Copy the file back to the Windows machine.  Again, run WinSCP from the
   Windows machine to do this.

6. Open wireshark.  From the "Edit" menu, choose "Preferences...", then expand
    "Protocols".  Scroll down and select SSL. Set an "SSL debug file:" and be
    sure that both "Reassemble SSL records spanning multiple TCP segments" and
    "Reassemble SSL Application Data spanning multiple SSL records:" are
    checked.  Then next to "RSA keys list:" click the "Edit..." button.  Click
    new, then enter the IP address of the server.  For "Port:", enter 443, and
    for "Protocol:", enter http (*not* https).  Select the "Key File", and
    leave the "Password:" field *blank*.  Then click "OK", "Apply", "OK,
    "Apply", and "OK".

7.  Once setup is complete, the client machine will use the MS-KKDCPP to send
    Kerberos traffic to the server.  The easiest way to trigger traffic is to
    log out and log back in on the client machine.

#### Troubleshooting ####

If no HTTPS traffic is observed but there is Kerberos traffic observed, check
the firewall settings on the client.  If they check out okay, check the policy
settings on the server, then force an update on the client.

If no HTTPS or Kerberos traffic is observed, run `klist` (without the
backticks) in a Command Prompt on the client.  If the user has tickets, reboot
the client machine and try again (and if that doesn't fix it, check your
wireshark settings).  Otherwise, verify the policy on the server and update
the client.

If HTTPS traffic is observed but cannot be decrypted, examine the wireshark
SSL log file for details.  If nothing seems awry, it is likely that the
initial handshake has not been captured. Rebooting one or both machines may
fix the problem.
