---
layout: post
---

For reasons I'll get into in a later post, I recently had need to deploy a
[krb5](http://web.mit.edu/kerberos/) KDC on top of LDAP.  Normally for
testing, I deploy on top of krb5's own datastore; this process is actually
documented pretty well
[upstream](http://web.mit.edu/kerberos/krb5-latest/doc/admin/install_kdc.html).
Barring that, I'm deploying using [freeIPA](https://www.freeipa.org/) which
makes the process easy as well.

## Once again

Don't do this.  It's almost certainly not what you want.  If you're setting up
a new deployment, you should use freeIPA and free your mind to think about
other things.  These instructions are only intended for if you cannot pull in
the dependencies of freeIPA, such as in a test suite.

## Background

I'm going to assume as little familiarity with LDAP as possible, because I
have very little familiarity with LDAP.  So: LDAP is a directory access
protocol.  This means that it stores information in a rigid heirarchy, and is
accessible using a standardized protocol (that features good security if you
enable it).

Most often, LDAP stores users and user attributes.  Here, we are going to use
it to store specifically users, password information (krb5 key material),
policy information, and everything else that krb5 can care about.  However, by
putting this information in LDAP, we can share it with other applications than
just those that speak Kerberos.  For instance, we can set up client machines
to speak LDAP and fetch the users allowed to log in to the machine, rather
than storing a user list locally.  (This is beyond the scope of this document;
a good project to look at is [sssd](https://fedorahosted.org/sssd/).)

## Setup LDAP

For this post, I'll be using OpenLDAP.  There exist other servers (389ds,
etc.) that are also good, but I am not going to weigh pros and cons here.  So
go ahead and install that.

### slapd.conf

Next, we need to make some decisions.  As in any Kerberos installation, you're
going to need a realm name.  For purposes of this, mine will be
**REALM.DNAME** because I'm trying to illustrate something.  More on that in
a bit.  You can pick anything here, but an uppercase version of your domain
name is a good choice.

You also need to pick a password.  I'm going to use "root".  You should not
use this password.  You should pick a better one, and use the LDAP controls to
store it outside the config file.  I will not be doing this here for clarity.

So with that in mind, I'm going to show the resulting config file I'm using
for Fedora and then indicate the changes for Debian:

```aconf
include    /usr/share/doc/krb5-server-ldap/kerberos.schema
include    /etc/openldap/schema/core.schema
include    /etc/openldap/schema/cosine.schema
include    /etc/openldap/schema/inetorgperson.schema
include    /etc/openldap/schema/nis.schema

database   config
rootdn     cn=root,cn=config
rootpw     root

moduleload back_mdb
database   mdb
suffix     "dc=realm,dc=dname"
rootdn     "cn=root,dc=realm,dc=dname"
rootpw     root
```

For Debian, the schema file all live in /etc/ldap/schema instead.  The
exception is kerberos.schema, which is shipped in zipped form at
*/usr/share/doc/krb5-kdc-ldap/kerberos.schema.gz* instead; you'll need to
unzip it somewhere (I recommend /etc/ldap/schema) and then include it from
there.

So, what does this file do?  Well, first it includes all the database
structures we need - that's the `include` lines.  Then we define two
databases - a magic configuration database "config", and an mdb database for
our actual realm.

In order to go further, we need to drop some LDAP terminology.  LDAP has a
very verbose notion of names that comes from its understaning of heirarchy.
And of course, because it's heirarchical, everything must be fully qualified;
this is why it gets a reputation for verbosity.  Do also note the splitting of
our **REALM.DNAME** into seperate pieces.

* A "dn" is a Distinguished Name, which is a fully qualified, unique reference
  to an entry.  (So `rootdn` is the dn for the root user.)
* A "dc" is a Domain Component, which we're using to locate the entry in an
  absolute heirarchy.  This is why it is the realm in lowercase: the realm is
  related to the DNS entry, which is globally unique.
* A "cn" is a Canonical Name, which is a name unique in that position in the
  heirarchy.  So there can be two `cn=root` as long as they are not both in
  the same `dc=...`.

All that is to say that the config database has root user named
`cn=root,cn=config`, and the actual realm database has one named
`cn=root,dc=realm,dc=dname`.

### kerberos.ldif

Now we need to add two base objects to our LDAP setup.  There are two ways to
do this: online and offline (i.e., with slapd running, and without).  I will
be using the latter because it's easier to script.

And of course we need another config file.  This time it's at least shorter:

```yaml
dn: dc=realm,dc=dname
objectClass: domain
dc: realm

dn: cn=Kerberos,dc=realm,dc=dname
objectClass: krbContainer
cn: Kerberos
```

This is a series of instructions to LDAP.  When we give the command, it will
add two entries:

* First, it will create a domain object within our realm object.
* Second, it will create a krbContainer, into which we will place krb5
  information.

So let's go ahead and perform those operations:

```sh
slapadd -f /path/to/slapd.conf -l /path/to/kerberos.ldif
```

and we're all set.

### Start LDAP

This is actually enough to satisfy LDAP, so let's start that now:

```sh
slapd -d 0 -f /path/to/slapd.conf -h ldap://kerberos.realm.dname
```

of coure replacing **kerberos.realm.dname** with your actual hostname.

Note that I have started the server with `ldap://` and not configured
encryption.  Do not do this in production.

## Setup KDC

This is actually the easy part, though I may be biased.

### stashsrvpw

First, we need to store the LDAP password somewhere the KDC can find it.
You'll want somethign like:

```sh
kdb5_ldap_util stashsrvpw -w root -H ldap://kerberos.realm.dname -f /path/to/stashfile "cn=root,dc=realm,dc=dname"
```

(substituting hostname and realm name as above), and enter the password
("root", in my case) when prompted.

### krb5.conf

Of course we need to set up a *krb5.conf*.  It should include at least the
following:

```ini
[libdefaults]
    default_realm = REALM.DNAME

[realms]
    REALM.DNAME = {
        kdc = kerberos.realm.dname
        admin_server = kerberos.realm.dname
    }

[domain_realm]
    .realm.dname = REALM.DNAME
    realm.dname = REALM.DNAME
```

all of which should is pretty standard.

### kdc.conf

This is where things get weirder.  We need something like this:

```ini
[dbmodules]
    REALM.DNAME = {
        db_library = kldap
        ldap_kerberos_container_dn = cn=Kerberos,dc=realm,dc=dname
        ldap_kdc_dn = cn=root,dc=realm,dc=dname
        ldap_kadmind_dn = cn=root,dc=realm,dc=dname
        ldap_service_password_file = /path/to/stashfile/you/made/above
        ldap_servers = ldap://kerberos.realm.dname
    }
```

substituting in the expected way.  (We don't need much more than that because
the KDC will read *krb5.conf* as well, though of course we can set plenty
more.)

Brief explanation: we need to tell the varios krb5 components how to connect
to LDAP.  It is possible to have separate user accounts for the kdc, kadmin,
etc., though I have not done so here.

### Populate

Okay, almost done.  We just have to tell Kerberos to populate a skeleton
database from this configuration.  Again we're going to use the LDAP tooling:

```sh
kdb5_ldap_util -H ldap://kerberos.realm.dname -D cn=root,dc=realm,dc=dname create -w root -s -r REALM.DNAME
```

where "root" is the LDAP password and all other substutions as before.  It
will prompt you for the KDC password as well; you'll want to come up with one.

This is the point at which new users should be added (using `kadmin.local`)
and the ACL file should be configured.  See the "Installing KDCs"
documentation for this; it works the same way.

### Pull the starter cable

Start the KDC with `krb5kdc -n` (depending on where your config files are, you
may need to pass it additional flags) and kadmind with `kadmind -nofork`.
This will keep them in the foreground for ease of debugging.

## You're good to go

This is pretty much everything that's needed for a test setup.  You can do
many powerful things with additional configuration, but before doing that I
recommend reading more about LDAP.

Hopefully this was helpful; if it could be more so, please let me know.  In
another post I'll go into what I was using the notes that became thi post for.
