---
layout: post
---

If you are someone who tends to get lost in Wikipedia (like me), **time** is a
fascinating topic to branch from.  Its very connected to other subjects, which
makes sense considering how integral it is to our lives.  Especially as
science has advanced our ability to tell time, we have had to think more about
what that means.

Fortunately, I am not overly concerned with metaphysics (right now); instead,
I want to talk about a more immediate concern.  Due to globalization effects
brought about by communication bandwidth increase and latency decrease, people
now exist who seriously defend the idea that we should adopt a singular,
global time.  Leaving out many details, the crux of the argument is, simply,
that since converting timezones is difficult, we should do away with them
entirely.

I personally know a handful of people who have done this: that is, set all of
their clocks to UTC, kept their calendars in UTC, and lived their lives by
UTC.  (All of them happen to live in what we call EST, but that is an accident
of where I myself have lived.)  They have, to my knowledge, all stopped doing
this, largely due to the vast inconvenience incurred.

Although one did it on a dare, the rest as far as I know tried it (for long
enough to adapt) due to the theoretical benefits of a global time.  If
everyone keeps the same time, then there will be no more issues with temporal
conversion, the argument goes.  Furthermore, issues like timezones being
artificially too wide would be mitigated since, rather than timezones being
close-but-not correct, they will be wildly divergent.  (My own EST is one
such: the distance between eastern Maine and Indiana is about a third the
width of the United States; another egregious instance is all of Central
America sharing a timezone.)

None of which is true, it turns out.  To the second point: while the
conversion to UTC does demonstrate that it is *possible* to exist in an
arbitrary timezone, their decision to revert reinforces the idea that it is
strongly undesirable.  More broadly, addressing the first point as well, what
seems to happen is not that everyone can communicate, but that our words for
times of day drift.  Noon becomes 20:00, or thereabouts (or 8pm, if you
insist).  I do not know whether it would fragment to pre-train time (where
every city had their own timezone), but it does not solve the fragmentation
issue at all.

More problematically, however, we do need some fragmentation.  Everyone in the
world cannot expect to keep UTC 09:00-17:00 as a work pattern and see the
sun (or at least, not enough).  To at least some degree, whatever this
fragmentation ends up being will be arbitrary; I can show that there must be
at least two wake/sleep patterns for the general population, and that more
would be good.  As an upper bound, one per city we know to be too many.  If
there were some subdivision of a day that were handy to sync to, that would be
nice; hours seem reasonable.  But not all timezones align in integral values
(have fun reading this Wikipedia article!).  And all that said, I also
recognize my own current inability to keep a 9-17 schedule (though I strongly
appreciate not being required to do so).

### Final thoughts

The biggest problem my UTC-curious friends experienced was timezone
conversion.  Of course, since everyone around you is one timezone, converting
to another, internal, timezone is work.  But a few months in, it gets even
worse: after learning the conversions to and from the local timezone, the
local timezone moves.  Daylight Savings Time begins (or ends, depending on
when), and all the conversions change.  Except that everything is actually
worse than that: only *some* of the time conversions change, because not
every zone has the same rules about savings time, not every country does it
the same, and not even everywhere within a zone implements it the same way.
(I encourage finding more about this at your local Wikipedia!)

And while it is of course a larger problem for those in UTC (as most things
are), Daylight Savings Time is a problem for everyone.  The problem could be
mitigated somewhat if every zone were to implement it at the same time, but
this is nonsense: one hemisphere will have crazily incorrect time, and while
this is technically better, there is little incentive for it.  Much more
appealing, I think, is the idea of abolishing Daylight Savings Time entirely.
I will leave it to others to better make the case for this.


