---
layout: post
tags:
  - brewing
  - art
---

I'm far from a graphic designer, but I do make these beers; the beers go into
bottles, and bottles need labels.  So I do what I can, and generally my tools
[Inkscape](https://inkscape.org/) and to a lesser extent
[GIMP](https://www.gimp.org/) keep me from making a complete fool of myself.
(I made some process changes this time, doing almost all the construction in
Inkscape, which worked much better for me.)

This is the third label I've designed to completion (i.e., printable and ready
to go on bottles).  I'm posting it in advance of another post about the beer
itself, which is currently bottle conditioning.  If/when I re-brew and make
posts about the beers the previous two go with, I may post them as well, but
no promises.  (Ask me in person if you're interested.)

So here's a PNG render (because web browsers are bad at SVG):

![The Universe as a Twisted Torus
(label)](/assets/2019-12-02-twisted-torus.png)

If you want the actual SVG, let me know, but there's nothing complicated
there.

Sources of the pieces are as follows:

- The flask is a modified version of [this CC0
  image](https://search.creativecommons.org/photos/e19fbc24-b7c6-4523-a252-bb16cbd4e2c4).

- The vegan logo is a similarly doctored version of [this CC0
  image](https://bearnd.wordpress.com/2014/06/28/logo-vegano/)

- The middle graphic was created by [NASA/WMAP](https://map.gsfc.nasa.gov/media/101080/index.html)

- The font is [Latin Modern
  Sans](http://www.gust.org.pl/projects/e-foundry/latin-modern)

I wanted to emphasize the "experimental" aspect of this one - I'm expecting
some of the bottles to be decidedly odd.  So there's a flask (very sciency)
and space for me to write bottle code (which will probably be in marker).

This actually led me to the font as well.  The LaTeX typesetting system, which
is used for many science papers, has a distinctive default font (Computer
Modern), which seemed a natural choice.  However, since LaTeX is a very
complicated tool, it's not easy to render this font directly.  Instead, I'm
using a derivative (Latin Modern), which behaves as a normal TTF.  It's
significantly less effort, differences aren't really noticeable, and I didn't
really want ligatures anyway.

Without giving away too much, part of the experiment involves some Norwegian
farmhouse yeast (kveik).  Use of this yeast has involved the (now) unusual
practice of storing and re-pitching the yeast cultures, often drying them out
in the interim.  A block of wood with holes ("yeast log") or a wooden loop
("yeast ring") would be lowered into the active fermentation, and then the
yeast would dry on it.  The next batch would be started by placing the wood
into wort and allowing the yeast to rehydrate.  There's good evidence that a
wooden puzzle construction in the shape of a twisted torus was used as a yeast
ring.  (For more on this topic, I suggest [Susan Verberg's "Scandanavian Yeast
Rings: The curious case of the Twisted
Torus"](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/335830187_Scandinavian_Yeast_Rings_The_curious_case_of_the_Twisted_Torus_Brewery_History_Journal_178_2019).)

Determining the shape of the universe is a fascinating problem which draws
from many fields, none of which I understand sufficiently to actually discuss
well.  However, given what we know, a toroidal (bagel) shape remains a
reasonable possibility.  Much of our data comes from readings taken by the
aforementioned WMAP from NASA, so it's not a far leap to using their data here
as well.  (I'm using the greyscale data, which is unfortunately not the most
recent, because I don't like working in color and the colors used for the
later releases don't readily lend themselves to greyscale conversion.)  To
explore this rabbit hole fully, you could start at [the wikipedia
page](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shape_of_the_universe).

I don't think anyone has seriously proposed a *twisted* torus as the universe
shape.  As I understand it, one consequence of such a shape would be the
observability of the same object in multiple directions from the same vantage
point.  This would be extremely difficult to actually notice, though, because
our "observation" happens at the speed of light, and presumably the object
would not be equidistant in both directions.

The wort I created is indeed brown, though very little else of the experiment
is stylistically appropriate for a brown ale - so "brownish" (which is also a
reference not worth tracking down).

Finally, finings are added to beer (and wine etc.) to clarify and filter.
Irish moss (despite the name, it's a seaweed) is about the least distressing
substance used for this purpose.  Unfortunately, listing ingredients is rare,
and listing finings basically never happens.  I feel it's important to include
ingredients (and vegan mark) to normalize this and to make life easier for
those with allergies/dietary restrictions.  Until then,
[barnivore](http://www.barnivore.com/) keeps a database of booze producers who
have indicated the status of their product.

