---
layout: post
tags:
  - books
---

Unlike last year, I tracked books for all of this year.  In large part, I did
so because I set the goal of reading 52 books on the year.  The intent of
course was to do one per week, but that didn't happen for a variety of
reasons, including the library (and bookstore) closing due to pandemic but
then re-opening for contactless pickup only (and it's currently closed again -
stay safe, everyone).

I made it with some breathing room - 62 on the year.  This includes 6 that I
strongly disliked and will not finish, but that still leaves 56 if you won't
grant me those.  I have notes on all of them, but I don't think anyone wants
to read my thoughts on the particular rabbit holes I'm down.  So I'll settle
for recommending a few, where "a few" happens to mean five.

#### _IBM and the Holocaust_, by Edwin Black (2001/2012)

As the title suggests, this is an exhaustively researched chronology of IBM's
involvement in the atrocities of Nazi Germany.  As I think most of my readers
work in tech, this is an extremely important albeit painful read.  With an eye
toward trying to prevent oppression and our participation in it, there's
plenty to think about here.  And even if you agree with IBM PR that ["there
appear to be no new facts or findings that bear on this important issue and
period"](https://www-03.ibm.com/press/us/en/pressrelease/1388.wss), I'm not
aware of any other summaries, especially ones this approachable.

#### _Breaking the Maya Code_, by Michael D. Coe (1992/2012)

Coe relates how the ability to understand Mayan carvings was "lost" and
rediscovered from the perspective of someone in the field who knew many of the
actors.  Hindsight allows a unique dual viewpoint: at once we see both the
fellow academics and humans trying to advance their field (and themselves),
while at the same time Coe doesn't shy away from pointing out how racism and
stubbornness held the field back.  This is important: they weren't trying to
be bad people, but they're extremely set in their ideas, to the detriment of
all.  Coe presents some as having a shocking level of contempt for their
subject: in almost all cases, researchers weren't at all familiar with
languages known to be related or spoken by descendents.

Pre-pandemic, I was fortunate enough to view the Ancient Nubia Now exhibit at
the Museum of Science here in Boston.  And while the display of artifacts and
telling of cultural history was excellent, the exhibit also focused on how
we've historically misunderstood Ancient Nubia especially in connection to
Ancient Egypt - to the point where Ancient Egypt has been exalted and in some
cases whitewashed, while Ancient Nubia has been held in significantly lower
regard and often held to be culturally inferior.  These attitudes toward
culture seemed familiar to me reading Coe after that, so I'm hopeful that we
might see progress on understanding Meroitic in the near future.

#### _Historical Brewing Techniques_, by Lars Marius Garshol (2020)

Lars Marius Garshol is known in brewing circles for bringing attention to the
farmhouse brewing tradition of Norway.  This book serves as a summary of sorts
to his work thus far.  There is detailed information on how the farmhouse
brewers of today carry out their craft (including recipes), as well as the
culture around brewing in this part of the world.  There are also pictures -
of brewing, the farms, and of the countryside itself (because when it's that
photogenic, you have to).  For geographical reasons, Norway is the main focus,
but Garshol also touches on Sweden, Finland, Lithuania, parts of Russia, and
others.

Lars Marius Garshol is also part of running Kornølfestival, an event which
celebrates Norwegian farmhouse brewing process and culture.  Due to pandemic,
the event was online-only this year by necessity - but it was streamed, and
the streams are achieved (part
[1](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eTDX6fds7EU) and
[2](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LNIbYj_J2QI)), and mostly in English.

#### _Player Piano_, by Kurt Vonnegut (1952)

Last year, I started reading through all of Vonnegut's work.  (This will
probably continue into next year as well - I have four novels left, plus
potentially the non-novel works.)  _Player Piano_ isn't the most important of
Vonnegut's writing (that's _Slaughterhouse Five_) or even the best
encapsulation of his style (it seems likely that's _Cat's Cradle_).  As
Vonnegut's first novel, the signatures of his style aren't as fully developed,
either.  But I found it intensely poignant, possibly because the subject
matter is less temporally bound.  Whatever the reason, this is my favorite of
his so far.

#### _The Life of the Buddha_ (1972/1992)

(Translated, selected, and arranged by Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli.  Edited by
Nyanaponika Thera and Bhikkhu Bodhi.  Texts selected from the Pali Canon.)

Buddhist tradition has preserved an immense amount of history and teaching
over ~2600 years.  (Generally this is held to be historically accurate, though
discussion of that goes beyond what I want to say in a book recommendation.)
The Pali Canon itself is massive, and often its components are sorted by
length or other measure.  The book extracts from that a chronology of the life
of the Buddha Gotama, with enough cultural context for it to maintain
coherence to a modern audience.  In other words, it's about as close as we can
come to knowing the person the Buddha was.

The BPS has made this work available free of charge [on their
website](http://www.bps.lk/library-search-select.php?id=bp101s), though I read
a physical copy from the library system.

Thank you for reading, and happy new year.
