---
layout: post
tags:
  - farm
---

*(This piece originally ran in Notes from the Field, a weekly column part of
the main newsletter sent to Waltham Fields Community Farm CSA-holders.  At the
time, I was a volunteer and not employed as a farmer.)*

This week, one of the crops we harvested was radishes.  The process for
harvesting radishes resembles that of many other crops: find and pull up a
plant, check for quality, prune the foliage, gather the right number into a
bundle, tie them off, and repeat.  But when held by the stems, a bundle of
radishes is floppy, making banding difficult.  We chatted about technique
while harvesting, and everyone has their own: for instance, some people hold
the stems radish-down, perpendicular to the ground, while I have more success
with a 45-degree angle.  But then, we all make different tiny movements to
complete a bundle, like catching the rubber band with the offhand thumb.  When
we become comfortable with an activity, the distance between the tool and our
body vanishes, and instead of moving our hands to move objects, we move the
objects directly.  The tool, the radishes, the rubber bands: all become an
extension of ourselves.  And this complexity of action creates a banded bundle
of beautiful vegetables, ready to be washed.

Against complacency, I have learned, is the phenomenon of "harvest creep".
When we as harvesters become comfortable with gathering bunches, the sizing of
a bunch can almost be done by feel.  This feel can be quite precise: I hear
legend of folks able to pick up not only bundles of vegetables but even rubber
bands and immediately know whether they are of the wrong size.  And yet, the
key is the "almost", since as one harvests, the size of gathered bundles tends
to "creep" up in size.  In a way, I find harvest creep reassuring: avoiding it
means our attention is a necessary part of the process.  We are not rote
actors, but rather overseers, active gatherers for this part of the cycle.

So in the field on Friday, we enjoyed perhaps one of the last warm days of the
year.  And we counted the radishes, just to be sure.
